README.md, before:

# Craft Streaming Video Plugin

A Craft CMS plugin that automatically generates HLS (HTTP Live Streaming) variants for video assets, enabling adaptive streaming with multiple quality levels.

## Features

- 🎥 **Automatic HLS Generation**: Converts uploaded videos to HLS format with multiple quality variants
- 📱 **Adaptive Streaming**: Automatically switches quality based on viewer's bandwidth and device
- 🎛️ **Multiple Quality Levels**: Generates 1080p, 720p, 480p, 240p, and 144p variants (plus source quality)
- 📐 **Aspect Ratio Preservation**: Maintains original video proportions for any format (not just 16:9)
- 🔧 **Smart Resolution Detection**: Only generates variants at or below the source video resolution
- 🗂️ **Clean File Management**: Automatically cleans up HLS files when assets are deleted
- 🌐 **Cross-Platform Storage**: Works with local storage, AWS S3, and other Craft volume types
- 🎮 **Frontend Integration**: Includes Twig template and GraphQL support
- ⚡ **Background Processing**: Uses Craft's queue system for non-blocking video processing

## Requirements

- Craft CMS 5.0 or later
- PHP 8.0 or later
- FFmpeg installed on the server

## Installation

### 1. Install the Plugin

```bash
# Via Composer
composer require buesing/craft-streaming-video

# Install via Craft CLI
php craft plugin/install streaming-video
```

### 2. Install FFmpeg

The plugin requires FFmpeg to be installed on your server.

#### DDEV (Recommended for Development)

Add to your `.ddev/config.yaml`:

```yaml
webimage_extra_packages:
  - ffmpeg
```

Then restart DDEV:

```bash
ddev restart
```

#### Other Environments

- **Ubuntu/Debian**: `sudo apt-get install ffmpeg`
- **CentOS/RHEL**: `sudo yum install ffmpeg`
- **macOS**: `brew install ffmpeg`
- **Docker**: Include FFmpeg in your container image

## How It Works

1. **Upload Detection**: When a video asset is uploaded or saved, the plugin automatically detects it
2. **Queue Processing**: An HLS preparation job is queued to avoid blocking the upload
3. **Quality Generation**: FFmpeg generates multiple quality variants based on the source resolution
4. **File Storage**: HLS files are stored in a hidden `__hls__/{asset-uid}/` folder in the same volume
5. **Cleanup**: When an asset is deleted, all associated HLS files are automatically removed

## Usage

### Frontend Templates

#### Basic Video Player

```twig
{% set video = entry.video.one() %}
{% if video and video.hlsPlaylistUrl %}
    {% include '_streamingvideo/player.twig' with { asset: video } %}
{% else %}
    <video controls>
        <source src="{{ video.url }}" type="{{ video.mimeType }}">
    </video>
{% endif %}
```

#### All Player Options

The player template supports the following options (all optional):

| Option                   | Type                | Default | Description                                                      |
|--------------------------|---------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `asset`                  | Asset               | —       | The Craft Asset element (required)                               |
| `autoplay`               | bool                | false   | Autoplay the video                                               |
| `muted`                  | bool                | false   | Mute the video                                                   |
| `loop`                   | bool                | false   | Loop the video                                                   |
| `playsinline`            | bool                | false   | Play inline on mobile devices                                    |
| `poster`                 | Asset or string     | null    | Craft Asset (uses its URL) or a URL string for the poster image  |
| `classname`              | string              | ''      | CSS class(es) for the video element                              |
| `disablepictureinpicture`| bool                | false   | Disable Picture-in-Picture button                                |
| `id`                     | string              | random  | The video element's ID (random if not provided)                  |

**Example:**

```twig
{# Using a Craft Asset as poster #}
{% include '@streamingvideo/player.twig' with {
  asset: entry.video.one(),
  poster: entry.posterImage.one(),
  autoplay: true,
  muted: true,
  loop: false,
  playsinline: true,
  classname: 'rounded shadow',
  disablepictureinpicture: true,
  id: 'my-custom-video-player'
} %}

{# Using a URL as poster #}
{% include '@streamingvideo/player.twig' with {
  asset: entry.video.one(),
  poster: 'https://example.com/poster.jpg'
} %}
```

### GraphQL

The plugin adds an `hlsPlaylistUrl` field to the Asset GraphQL type:

```graphql
query {
  entries {
    ... on MySection {
      videoField {
        url
        hlsPlaylistUrl
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Checking Stream Availability

```twig
{% set video = entry.video.one() %}
{% if video.canStreamVideo %}
    <p>This video supports streaming</p>
    {% if video.hlsPlaylistUrl %}
        <p>HLS streaming is available</p>
    {% else %}
        <p>HLS encoding in progress...</p>
    {% endif %}
{% endif %}
```

## Configuration

### Quality Variants

The plugin generates the following quality variants by default:

| Quality | Resolution | Video Bitrate | Audio Bitrate |
|---------|------------|---------------|---------------|
| 1080p   | 1920×1080  | 5000k         | 128k          |
| 720p    | 1280×720   | 3000k         | 128k          |
| 480p    | 854×480    | 1500k         | 96k           |
| 240p    | ~427×240   | 800k          | 64k           |
| 144p    | ~256×144   | 400k          | 64k           |
| Source  | Original   | 8000k         | 192k          |

*Note: Only variants with resolution ≤ source video are generated*

## Troubleshooting

### FFmpeg Not Found

**Error**: `ffmpeg: not found`

**Solution**: Install FFmpeg on your server (see Installation section above)

### Permission Issues

**Error**: `Failed to create temp directory`

**Solution**: Ensure the web server has write permissions to Craft's temp directory

### Large File Processing

For very large video files, you may need to:

1. Increase PHP memory limit: `ini_set('memory_limit', '1G')`
2. Increase max execution time: `ini_set('max_execution_time', 0)`
3. Configure your queue system for long-running jobs

### Debug Information

Check Craft's logs at `storage/logs/web.log` for detailed processing information:

```bash
# Follow logs in real-time
tail -f storage/logs/web.log | grep streamingvideo
```

## License

This plugin is licensed under the Craft License.

## Support

For issues and feature requests, please use the GitHub issue tracker.

Commit message:

Add info about resaving assets and fall back to HTML player

README.md, after:

# Craft Streaming Video Plugin

A Craft CMS plugin that automatically generates HLS (HTTP Live Streaming) variants for video assets, enabling adaptive streaming with multiple quality levels.

## Features

- 🎥 **Automatic HLS Generation**: Converts uploaded videos to HLS format with multiple quality variants
- 📱 **Adaptive Streaming**: Automatically switches quality based on viewer's bandwidth and device
- 🎛️ **Multiple Quality Levels**: Generates 1080p, 720p, 480p, 240p, and 144p variants (plus source quality)
- 📐 **Aspect Ratio Preservation**: Maintains original video proportions for any format (not just 16:9)
- 🔧 **Smart Resolution Detection**: Only generates variants at or below the source video resolution
- 🗂️ **Clean File Management**: Automatically cleans up HLS files when assets are deleted
- 🌐 **Cross-Platform Storage**: Works with local storage, AWS S3, and other Craft volume types
- 🎮 **Frontend Integration**: Includes Twig template and GraphQL support
- ⚡ **Background Processing**: Uses Craft's queue system for non-blocking video processing

## Requirements

- Craft CMS 5.0 or later
- PHP 8.0 or later
- FFmpeg installed on the server

## Installation

### 1. Install the Plugin

```bash
# Via Composer
composer require buesing/craft-streaming-video

# Install via Craft CLI
php craft plugin/install streaming-video
```

### 2. Install FFmpeg

The plugin requires FFmpeg to be installed on your server.

#### DDEV (Recommended for Development)

Add to your `.ddev/config.yaml`:

```yaml
webimage_extra_packages:
  - ffmpeg
```

Then restart DDEV:

```bash
ddev restart
```

#### Other Environments

- **Ubuntu/Debian**: `sudo apt-get install ffmpeg`
- **CentOS/RHEL**: `sudo yum install ffmpeg`
- **macOS**: `brew install ffmpeg`
- **Docker**: Include FFmpeg in your container image

## How It Works

1. **Upload Detection**: When a video asset is uploaded or saved, the plugin automatically detects it
2. **Queue Processing**: An HLS preparation job is queued to avoid blocking the upload
3. **Quality Generation**: FFmpeg generates multiple quality variants based on the source resolution
4. **File Storage**: HLS files are stored in a hidden `__hls__/{asset-uid}/` folder in the same volume
5. **Cleanup**: When an asset is deleted, all associated HLS files are automatically removed

## Usage

### Frontend Templates

#### Basic Video Player

```twig
{% set video = entry.video.one() %}
{% if video and video.hlsPlaylistUrl %}
    {% include '_streamingvideo/player.twig' with { asset: video } %}
{% else %}
    <video controls>
        <source src="{{ video.url }}" type="{{ video.mimeType }}">
    </video>
{% endif %}
```

#### All Player Options

The player template supports the following options (all optional):

| Option                   | Type                | Default | Description                                                      |
|--------------------------|---------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `asset`                  | Asset               | —       | The Craft Asset element (required)                               |
| `autoplay`               | bool                | false   | Autoplay the video                                               |
| `muted`                  | bool                | false   | Mute the video                                                   |
| `loop`                   | bool                | false   | Loop the video                                                   |
| `playsinline`            | bool                | false   | Play inline on mobile devices                                    |
| `poster`                 | Asset or string     | null    | Craft Asset (uses its URL) or a URL string for the poster image  |
| `classname`              | string              | ''      | CSS class(es) for the video element                              |
| `disablepictureinpicture`| bool                | false   | Disable Picture-in-Picture button                                |
| `id`                     | string              | random  | The video element's ID (random if not provided)                  |

**Example:**

```twig
{# Using a Craft Asset as poster #}
{% include '@streamingvideo/player.twig' with {
  asset: entry.video.one(),
  poster: entry.posterImage.one(),
  autoplay: true,
  muted: true,
  loop: false,
  playsinline: true,
  classname: 'rounded shadow',
  disablepictureinpicture: true,
  id: 'my-custom-video-player'
} %}

{# Using a URL as poster #}
{% include '@streamingvideo/player.twig' with {
  asset: entry.video.one(),
  poster: 'https://example.com/poster.jpg'
} %}
```

### GraphQL

The plugin adds an `hlsPlaylistUrl` field to the Asset GraphQL type:

```graphql
query {
  entries {
    ... on MySection {
      videoField {
        url
        hlsPlaylistUrl
        title
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Checking Stream Availability

```twig
{% set video = entry.video.one() %}
{% if video.canStreamVideo %}
    <p>This video supports streaming</p>
    {% if video.hlsPlaylistUrl %}
        <p>HLS streaming is available</p>
    {% else %}
        <p>HLS encoding in progress...</p>
    {% endif %}
{% endif %}
```

## Configuration

### Quality Variants

The plugin generates the following quality variants by default:

| Quality | Resolution | Video Bitrate | Audio Bitrate |
|---------|------------|---------------|---------------|
| 1080p   | 1920×1080  | 5000k         | 128k          |
| 720p    | 1280×720   | 3000k         | 128k          |
| 480p    | 854×480    | 1500k         | 96k           |
| 240p    | ~427×240   | 800k          | 64k           |
| 144p    | ~256×144   | 400k          | 64k           |
| Source  | Original   | 8000k         | 192k          |

*Note: Only variants with resolution ≤ source video are generated*

### Processing Existing Videos

If you're adding this plugin to an existing site with video assets, you'll need to resave all existing video assets to trigger HLS conversion:

```bash
# Standard Craft installation
php craft resave/assets

# Using DDEV
ddev craft resave/assets
```

This will process all existing video assets and generate HLS streaming variants in the background.

## Troubleshooting

### FFmpeg Not Found

**Error**: `ffmpeg: not found`

**Solution**: Install FFmpeg on your server (see Installation section above)

### Permission Issues

**Error**: `Failed to create temp directory`

**Solution**: Ensure the web server has write permissions to Craft's temp directory

### Large File Processing

For very large video files, you may need to:

1. Increase PHP memory limit: `ini_set('memory_limit', '1G')`
2. Increase max execution time: `ini_set('max_execution_time', 0)`
3. Configure your queue system for long-running jobs

### Debug Information

Check Craft's logs at `storage/logs/web.log` for detailed processing information:

```bash
# Follow logs in real-time
tail -f storage/logs/web.log | grep streamingvideo
```

## License

This plugin is licensed under the Craft License.

## Support

For issues and feature requests, please use the GitHub issue tracker.
